---
layout : post
title : Why Be Nice When You Get Paid To Be Right?
excerpt: I've worked with some very smart people and some very kind people but the ones that really inspired me are those that combine both traits. I don't know where the story comes from that kindness and success are mutually exclusive but think it's time we started to re-write it.
---

I work in a successful, and growing, technology company. It's the kind of company that attracts a lot of really clever people because the challenges are big, the revenue is increasing and the snacks are plentiful. The founders are Danish and swear a lot and also have a strong commitment to creating the kind of work environment that puts people first. This manifests in many ways - our Corporate Social Responsibility program where we spend time and money on the communities we live and work in; the (Relate)[https://relate.zendesk.com/] movement aimed at redefining corporate customer support as a relationship between two human beings; the support for flexible working hours and extended parental leave; our core company value: 'Don\'t hire assholes'. I've been there for ten months now and it occured to me recently that I've been waiting for the other shoe to drop, for all the assholes to appear (company values notwithstanding). Because the company is very succesful and growing fast and so it stands to reason that there must be some major dicks around somewhere because success and dickishness are synonymous. Right? Or, have I just been influenced by all of the modern myths we've created that equate affluence with being a jerk? 

I have even more reason to reject that myth than most. I've been studying Tibetan Buddhism for over ten years now, one of the central tennants of which is cultivating the practice of compassion. I know kindness is a quality that can be learned because I learned it. My little brother can tell you exactly what kind of a heinous bitch I was growing up, I don't think he ever won a game against me, if I couldn't beat him fair and square I cheated. Most people I meet these days, however, seem to think I'm quite nice. Nothing makes me feel better than doing something that benefits someone else, so I do it as often as I can. Although I still make a lot of selfish, short-sighted decisions I hope I'm getting better at recognising them when I do and aspire to make them less. I can't help but notice that the kinder I try to be, the more I put the welfare of the team ahead of myself the more my career advances and amazing opportunities (like attending the Grace Hopper Conference) come my way. This could be a coincidence, but I have never asked for a promotion or a payrise (or to attend the Grace Hopper Conference) and yet it keeps happening in spite of my lack of ambition. It isn't because I'm a genius computer programmer, a job at which I have always been happily in the middle of the bell curve. 

My hypothesis that my niceness has got me a really sweet career is starting to be backed up by some proper research. Google, psychological safety etc...

#### But What About Steve Jobs?

Yes, he was famously not nice and even more famous for being one of the most successful innovators of the last thirty years. If you are the next Steve Jobs and you also aren't a nice person then keep doing your thing, I can't argue with what he accomplished. But if you aren't quite at the Steve Jobs level of genius then you are going to need smart people who want to work with you, and that's where being a bit nicer might come into play. Looking at Steve's life story, I wonder how much more he could have accomplished if he spent more time building and creating and less time getting fired or kicked out and having to start all over again. Maybe if he'd been nicer...

#### What Being 'Nice' Really Means

Defending ideas, being passionate, using incredibly foul language, debating, telling dirty jokes, having a bad day (or week or month), wanting to win, striving for excellence or promotion and helping oneself to the biggest piece of cake at an office birthday party are all things that nice people do. If good intentions and empathy are present and there is a decent relationship between the people involved then nearly any kind of behaviour is acceptable. If you don't know if you have established the kind of relationship that can handle a crude remark or a profane putdown then don't do it.


Computer programming is great fun, and also quite a vigorous mental exercise. To do it well takes a number of qualities but foremost is a bloody-minded persistence in the face of the unknown. The desire to continue to worry away at a problem until you have solved it and be able to justify why your solution is the right one. There are many more ways to solve the most basic of computer science problems than there are to skin any number of felines, and probably canines and equines as well. 
